akka-docs/java/logging.rst, before:

.. _logging-java:

################
 Logging (Java)
################

.. sidebar:: Contents

   .. contents:: :local:

How to Log
==========

Create a ``LoggingAdapter`` and use the ``error``, ``warning``, ``info``, or ``debug`` methods,
as illustrated in this example:

.. includecode:: code/akka/docs/event/LoggingDocTestBase.java
   :include: imports,my-actor

The second parameter to the ``Logging.getLogger`` is the source of this logging channel.
The source object is translated to a String according to the following rules:

  * if it is an Actor or ActorRef, its path is used
  * in case of a String it is used as is
  * in case of a class an approximation of its simpleName
  * and in all other cases the simpleName of its class

The log message may contain argument placeholders ``{}``, which will be substituted if the log level
is enabled.

Event Handler
=============

Logging is performed asynchronously through an event bus. You can configure which event handlers that should
subscribe to the logging events. That is done using the 'event-handlers' element in the :ref:`configuration`.
Here you can also define the log level.

.. code-block:: ruby

  akka {
    # Event handlers to register at boot time (Logging$DefaultLogger logs to STDOUT)
    event-handlers = ["akka.event.Logging$DefaultLogger"]
    # Options: ERROR, WARNING, INFO, DEBUG
    loglevel = "DEBUG"
  }

The default one logs to STDOUT and is registered by default. It is not intended to be used for production. There is also an :ref:`slf4j-java`
event handler available in the 'akka-slf4j' module.

Example of creating a listener:

.. includecode:: code/akka/docs/event/LoggingDocTestBase.java
   :include: imports,imports-listener,my-event-listener


.. _slf4j-java:

SLF4J
=====

Akka provides an event handler for `SL4FJ <http://www.slf4j.org/>`_. This module is available in the 'akka-slf4j.jar'.
It has one single dependency; the slf4j-api jar. In runtime you also need a SLF4J backend, we recommend `Logback <http://logback.qos.ch/>`_:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <groupId>ch.qos.logback</groupId>
       <artifactId>logback-classic</artifactId>
       <version>1.0.0</version>
       <scope>runtime</scope>
     </dependency>

You need to enable the Slf4jEventHandler in the 'event-handlers' element in
the :ref:`configuration`. Here you can also define the log level of the event bus.
More fine grained log levels can be defined in the configuration of the SLF4J backend
(e.g. logback.xml). The String representation of the source object that is used when
creating the ``LoggingAdapter`` correspond to the name of the SL4FJ logger.

.. code-block:: ruby

  akka {
    event-handlers = ["akka.event.slf4j.Slf4jEventHandler"]
    loglevel = "DEBUG"
  }

Logging Thread and Akka Source in MDC
-------------------------------------

Since the logging is done asynchronously the thread in which the logging was performed is captured in
Mapped Diagnostic Context (MDC) with attribute name ``sourceThread``.
With Logback the thread name is available with ``%X{sourceThread}`` specifier within the pattern layout configuration::

  <appender name="STDOUT" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <layout>
      <pattern>%date{ISO8601} %-5level %logger{36} %X{sourceThread} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </layout>
  </appender>

Another helpful facility is that Akka captures the actor’s address when
instantiating a logger within it, meaning that the full instance identification
is available for associating log messages e.g. with members of a router. This
information is available in the MDC with attribute name ``akkaSource``::

  <appender name="STDOUT" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <layout>
      <pattern>%date{ISO8601} %-5level %logger{36} %X{akkaSource} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </layout>
  </appender>

For more details on what this attribute contains—also for non-actors—please see
`How to Log`_.

Commit message:

incorporate review feedback
- tons of documentation added
- lift extraction of logClass into LogSource type-class
- prefer Props.empty

akka-docs/java/logging.rst, after:

.. _logging-java:

################
 Logging (Java)
################

.. sidebar:: Contents

   .. contents:: :local:

How to Log
==========

Create a ``LoggingAdapter`` and use the ``error``, ``warning``, ``info``, or ``debug`` methods,
as illustrated in this example:

.. includecode:: code/akka/docs/event/LoggingDocTestBase.java
   :include: imports,my-actor

The first parameter to ``Logging.getLogger`` could also be any
:class:`LoggingBus`, specifically ``system.eventStream()``; in the demonstrated
case, the actor system’s address is included in the ``akkaSource``
representation of the log source (see `Logging Thread and Akka Source in MDC`_)
while in the second case this is not automatically done. The second parameter
to ``Logging.getLogger`` is the source of this logging channel.  The source
object is translated to a String according to the following rules:

  * if it is an Actor or ActorRef, its path is used
  * in case of a String it is used as is
  * in case of a class an approximation of its simpleName
  * and in all other cases the simpleName of its class

The log message may contain argument placeholders ``{}``, which will be substituted if the log level
is enabled.

The Java :class:`Class` of the log source is also included in the generated
:class:`LogEvent`. In case of a simple string this is replaced with a “marker”
class :class:`akka.event.DummyClassForStringSources` in order to allow special
treatment of this case, e.g. in the SLF4J event listener which will then use
the string instead of the class’ name for looking up the logger instance to
use.

Event Handler
=============

Logging is performed asynchronously through an event bus. You can configure which event handlers that should
subscribe to the logging events. That is done using the 'event-handlers' element in the :ref:`configuration`.
Here you can also define the log level.

.. code-block:: ruby

  akka {
    # Event handlers to register at boot time (Logging$DefaultLogger logs to STDOUT)
    event-handlers = ["akka.event.Logging$DefaultLogger"]
    # Options: ERROR, WARNING, INFO, DEBUG
    loglevel = "DEBUG"
  }

The default one logs to STDOUT and is registered by default. It is not intended to be used for production. There is also an :ref:`slf4j-java`
event handler available in the 'akka-slf4j' module.

Example of creating a listener:

.. includecode:: code/akka/docs/event/LoggingDocTestBase.java
   :include: imports,imports-listener,my-event-listener


.. _slf4j-java:

SLF4J
=====

Akka provides an event handler for `SL4FJ <http://www.slf4j.org/>`_. This module is available in the 'akka-slf4j.jar'.
It has one single dependency; the slf4j-api jar. In runtime you also need a SLF4J backend, we recommend `Logback <http://logback.qos.ch/>`_:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <dependency>
       <groupId>ch.qos.logback</groupId>
       <artifactId>logback-classic</artifactId>
       <version>1.0.0</version>
       <scope>runtime</scope>
     </dependency>

You need to enable the Slf4jEventHandler in the 'event-handlers' element in
the :ref:`configuration`. Here you can also define the log level of the event bus.
More fine grained log levels can be defined in the configuration of the SLF4J backend
(e.g. logback.xml). The String representation of the source object that is used when
creating the ``LoggingAdapter`` correspond to the name of the SL4FJ logger.

.. code-block:: ruby

  akka {
    event-handlers = ["akka.event.slf4j.Slf4jEventHandler"]
    loglevel = "DEBUG"
  }

Logging Thread and Akka Source in MDC
-------------------------------------

Since the logging is done asynchronously the thread in which the logging was performed is captured in
Mapped Diagnostic Context (MDC) with attribute name ``sourceThread``.
With Logback the thread name is available with ``%X{sourceThread}`` specifier within the pattern layout configuration::

  <appender name="STDOUT" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <layout>
      <pattern>%date{ISO8601} %-5level %logger{36} %X{sourceThread} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </layout>
  </appender>

.. note::
  
  It will probably be a good idea to use the ``sourceThread`` MDC value also in
  non-Akka parts of the application in order to have this property consistently
  available in the logs.

Another helpful facility is that Akka captures the actor’s address when
instantiating a logger within it, meaning that the full instance identification
is available for associating log messages e.g. with members of a router. This
information is available in the MDC with attribute name ``akkaSource``::

  <appender name="STDOUT" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <layout>
      <pattern>%date{ISO8601} %-5level %logger{36} %X{akkaSource} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </layout>
  </appender>

For more details on what this attribute contains—also for non-actors—please see
`How to Log`_.
