akka-docs/cluster/new.rst, before:


.. _cluster:

################
 New Clustering
################


Intro
=====

TODO
 
Terms
=====

These terms are used throughout the documentation. 

**node**
  A logical member of a cluster. There could be multiple nodes on a physical
  machine. Defined by a `hostname:port` tuple.

**cluster**
  A set of nodes. Contains distributed Akka applications.

**partition**
  An actor (possibly a subtree of actors) in the Akka application that
  is distributed within the cluster.

**partition path**
  Also referred to as the actor address on the format `actor1/actor2/actor3`

**base node**
  The first node (with nodes in sorted order) that contains a partition.

**instance count**
  The number of instances of a partition in the cluster. Also referred to as the
  ``N-value`` of the partition.

**partition table**
  A mapping from partition path to base node and its ``N-value``
  (e.g. its instance count).
 
Cluster
=======

A cluster is made up of a set of member nodes. The identifier for each node is a
`hostname:port` pair. An Akka application is distributed over a cluster with each node
hosting some part of the application. Cluster membership and partitioning of the
application are decoupled. A node could be a member of a cluster without hosting
any actors.

Gossip
------

The cluster membership used in Akka is based on Amazon's `Dynamo`_
system and particularly the approach taken Basho's' `Riak`_
distributed database. Cluster membership is communicated using a
`Gossip Protocol`_. The current state of the cluster is gossiped
randomly through the cluster. Joining a cluster is initiated by
specifying a set of ``seed`` nodes with which to begin gossiping.

The gossip protocol maintains the list of live and dead
nodes. Periodically, default is every 1 second, this module chooses a
random node and initiates a round of Gossip with it. Whenever it gets
gossip updates it updates the `Failure Detector`_ with the liveness
information.

The nodes defined as ``seed`` nodes are just regular member nodes whos
only "special role" is to function as contact points in the cluster
and to help breaking logical partitions as seen in the gossip
algorithm defined below.

During each of these runs the node initiates gossip exchange according
to following rules:

1. Gossip to random live node (if any)
2. Gossip to random unreachable node with certain probability
   depending on number of unreachable and live nodes
3. If the node gossiped to at (1) was not a ``seed`` node, or the number of live 
   nodes is less than number of seeds, gossip to random ``seed`` with
   certain probability depending on number of unreachable, seed and live nodes.

TODO: More details about our version of push-pull-gossip.

.. _Gossip Protocol: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol
.. _Dynamo: http://www.allthingsdistributed.com/files/amazon-dynamo-sosp2007.pdf
.. _Riak: http://basho.com/technology/architecture/

Vector Clocks
-------------

`Vector clocks`_ are an algorithm for generating a partial ordering of
events in a distributed system and detecting causality violations.

We use vector clocks to to reconcile and merge differences in cluster state
during gossiping. A vector clock is a set of (node, counter) pairs. Each update
to the cluster state has an accompanying update to the vector clock.

One problem with vector clocks is that their history can over time be
very long, which will both make comparisons take longer time as well
as take up unnecessary memory. To solve that problem we do pruning of
the vector clocks according to the `pruning algorithm
<http://wiki.basho.com/Vector-Clocks.html#Vector-Clock-Pruning>_`
in Riak.

.. _Vector Clocks: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_clock

Gossip convergence
------------------

Information about the cluster converges at certain points of time. This is when
all nodes have seen the same cluster state. To be able to recognise this
convergence a map from node to current vector clock is also passed as part of
the gossip state. Gossip convergence cannot occur while any nodes are
unreachable, either the nodes become reachable again, or the nodes need to be
moved into the ``down`` or ``removed`` states (see section on `Member
states`_ below).

Failure Detector
----------------- 

The failure detector is responsible for trying to detect if a node is
unreachable from the rest of the cluster. For this we are using an
implementation of the `Phi Accrual Failure Detector` as defined in this
`paper <http://ddg.jaist.ac.jp/pub/HDY+04.pdf>`_ by Hayashibara et al. 

An accrual failure detector decouple monitoring and
interpretation. That makes them applicable to a wider area of
scenarios and more adequate to build generic failure detection
services. The idea is that it is keeping a history of failure
statistics, calculated from heartbeats recevied from the gossip
protocol, and is trying to do educated guesses by taking multiple
factors, and how they accumulate over time, into account in order to
come up with a better guess if a specific node is up or down. Rather
than just answering "yes" or "no" to the question "is the node down?"
it returns a ``phi`` value representing the likelyhood that the node
is down.

The ``threshold`` that is the basis for the calculation is
configurable by the user. A low ``threshold`` is prone to generate
many wrong suspicions but ensures a quick detection in the event of a
real crash. Conversely, a high ``threshold`` generates fewer mistakes
but needs more time to detect actual crashes. The default
``threshold`` is 8 and is appropriate for most situations. However in
cloud environments, such as Amazon EC2, the value could be increased
to 12 in order to account for network issues that sometimes occur on
such platforms.

Leader
------

After gossip convergence a leader for the cluster can be determined. There is no
leader election process, the leader can always be recognised deterministically
by any node whenever there is gossip convergence. The leader is simply the first
node in sorted order that is able to take the leadership role, where the only
allowed member states for a leader are ``up`` or ``leaving``.

The role of the leader is to shift members in and out of the cluster, changing
``joining`` members to the ``up`` state or ``exiting`` members to the
``removed`` state, and to schedule rebalancing across the cluster. Currently
leader actions are only triggered by receiving a new cluster state with gossip
convergence but it may also be possible for the user to explicitly rebalance the
cluster by specifying migrations, or to rebalance the cluster automatically
based on metrics gossiped by the member nodes.

The leader also has the power, if configured so, to "auto-down" a node
that according the Failure Detector is considured unreachable. This
means setting the unreachable node status to ``down`` automatically.

Membership Lifecycle
--------------------

A node begins in the ``joining`` state. Once all nodes have seen that the new
node is joining (through gossip convergence) the leader will set the member
state to ``up`` and can start assigning partitions to the new node.

If a node is leaving the cluster in a safe, expected manner then it switches to
the ``leaving`` state. The leader will reassign partitions across the cluster
(it is possible for a leaving node to itself be the leader). When all partition
handoff has completed then the node will change to the ``exiting`` state. Once
all nodes have seen the exiting state (convergence) the leader will remove the
node from the cluster, marking it as ``removed``.

A node can also be removed forcefully by moving it directly to the ``removed``
state using the ``remove`` action. The cluster will rebalance based on the new
cluster membership.

If a node is unreachable then gossip convergence is not possible and therefore
any leader actions are also not possible (for instance, allowing a node to
become a part of the cluster, or changing actor distribution). To be able to
move forward the state of the unreachable nodes must be changed. If the
unreachable node is experiencing only transient difficulties then it can be
explicitly marked as ``down`` using the ``down`` user action. When this node
comes back up and begins gossiping it will automatically go through the joining
process again. If the unreachable node will be permanently down then it can be
removed from the cluster directly with the ``remove`` user action. The cluster
can also *auto-down* a node using the accrual failure detector.


State diagram for the member states
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. image:: images/member-states.png


Member states
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **joining**
    transient state when joining a cluster

- **up**
    normal operating state

- **leaving** / **exiting**
    states during graceful removal

- **removed**
    tombstone state (no longer a member)

- **down**
    marked as down/offline/unreachable


User actions
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **join**
    join a single node to a cluster - can be explicit or automatic on
    startup if a list of seed nodes have been specified in the configuration

- **leave**
    tell a node to leave the cluster gracefully

- **down**
    mark a node as temporarily down

- **remove**
    remove a node from the cluster immediately


Leader actions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The leader have the following duties:

- shifting members in and out of the cluster

  - joining -> up

  - exiting -> removed

- partition distribution

  - scheduling handoffs (pending changes)

  - setting the partition table (partition path -> base node)

  - Automatic rebalancing based on runtime metrics in the
    system (such as CPU, RAM, Garbage Collection, mailbox depth etc.)

Partitioning
============

Each partition (an actor or actor subtree) in the actor system is
assigned to a base node. The mapping from partition path (actor
address on the format "a/b/c") to base node is stored in the partition
table and is maintained as part of the cluster state through the
gossip protocol. The partition table is only updated by the leader
node. If the partition has a configured instance count, referred to as
the ``N-value``, greater than one, then the location of the other
instances can be found deterministically by counting from the base
node. (The ``N-value`` is larger than 1 when a actor is configured to
be routed.) The first instance will be found on the base node, and the
other instances on the next N-1 nodes, given the nodes in sorted
order.

TODO: discuss how different N values within the tree work (especially subtrees
with a greater or lesser N value). A simple implementation would only allow the
highest-up-the-tree, non-singular (greater than one) value to be used for any
subtree.

When rebalancing is required the leader will schedule handoffs, gossiping a set
of pending changes, and when each change is complete the leader will update the
partition table.

TODO: look further into how actors will be distributed and also avoiding
unnecessary migrations just to create a more balanced cluster.


Handoff
-------

Handoff for an actor-based system is different than for a data-based system. The
most important point is that message ordering (from a given node to a given
actor instance) may need to be maintained. If an actor is a singleton
actor (only one instance possible throughout the cluster) then the
cluster may also need to assure that there is only one such actor active at any
one time. Both of these situations can be handled by forwarding and buffering
messages during transitions.

A *graceful handoff* (one where the previous host node is up and running during
the handoff), given a previous host node ``N1``, a new host node ``N2``, and an
actor partition ``A`` to be migrated from ``N1`` to ``N2``, has this general
structure:

  1. the leader sets a pending change for ``N1`` to handoff ``A`` to ``N2``

  2. ``N1`` notices the pending change and sends an initialization message to ``N2``

  3. in response ``N2`` creates ``A`` and sends back a ready message

  4. after receiving the ready message ``N1`` marks the change as
     complete and shuts down ``A``

  5. the leader sees the migration is complete and updates the partition table

  6. all nodes eventually see the new partitioning and use ``N2``


Transitions
^^^^^^^^^^^

There are transition times in the handoff process where different approaches can
be used to give different guarantees.


Migration transition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first transition starts when ``N1`` initiates the moving of ``A`` and ends
when ``N1`` receives the ready message, and is referred to as the *migration
transition*.

The first question is; during the migration transition, should:

- ``N1`` continue to process messages for ``A``?  

- Or is it important that no messages for ``A`` are processed on
  ``N1`` once migration begins?

If it is okay for the previous host node ``N1`` to process messages during migration
then there is nothing that needs to be done at this point.

If no messages are to be processed on the previous host node during migration
then there are two possibilities: the messages are forwarded to the new host and
buffered until the actor is ready, or the messages are simply dropped by
terminating the actor and allowing the normal dead letter process to be used.


Update transition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The second transition begins when the migration is marked as complete
and ends when all nodes have the updated partition table (when all
nodes will use ``N2`` as the host for ``A``), e.g. we have
convergence, and is referred to as the *update transition*.

Once the update transition begins ``N1`` can forward any messages it receives
for ``A`` to the new host ``N2``. The question is whether or not message
ordering needs to be preserved. If messages sent to the previous host node
``N1`` are being forwarded, then it is possible that a message sent to ``N1``
could be forwarded after a direct message to the new host ``N2``, breaking
message ordering from a client to actor ``A``.

In this situation ``N2`` can keep a buffer for messages per sending
node. Each buffer is flushed and removed when an acknowledgement
(``ack``) message has been received. When each node in the cluster
sees the partition update it first sends an ``ack`` message to the
previous host node ``N1`` before beginning to use ``N2`` as the new
host for ``A``. Any messages sent from the client node directly to
``N2`` will be buffered. ``N1`` can count down the number of acks to
determine when no more forwarding is needed. The ``ack`` message from
any node will always follow any other messages sent to ``N1``. When
``N1`` receives the ``ack`` message it also forwards it to ``N2`` and
again this ``ack`` message will follow any other messages already
forwarded for ``A``. When ``N2`` receives an ``ack`` message, the
buffer for the sending node can be flushed and removed. Any subsequent
messages from this sending node can be queued normally. Once all nodes
in the cluster have acknowledged the partition change and ``N2`` has
cleared all buffers, the handoff is complete and message ordering has
been preserved. In practice the buffers should remain small as it is
only those messages sent directly to ``N2`` before the acknowledgement
has been forwarded that will be buffered.


Graceful handoff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A more complete process for graceful handoff would be:

  1. the leader sets a pending change for ``N1`` to handoff ``A`` to ``N2``


  2. ``N1`` notices the pending change and sends an initialization message to
     ``N2``. Options:

     a. keep ``A`` on ``N1`` active and continuing processing messages as normal

     b. ``N1`` forwards all messages for ``A`` to ``N2``

     c. ``N1`` drops all messages for ``A`` (terminate ``A`` with messages
        becoming dead letters)


  3. in response ``N2`` creates ``A`` and sends back a ready message. Options:

     a. ``N2`` simply processes messages for ``A`` as normal

     b. ``N2`` creates a buffer per sending node for ``A``. Each buffer is
        opened (flushed and removed) when an acknowledgement for the sending
        node has been received (via ``N1``)


  4. after receiving the ready message ``N1`` marks the change as complete. Options:

     a. ``N1`` forwards all messages for ``A`` to ``N2`` during the update transition

     b. ``N1`` drops all messages for ``A`` (terminate ``A`` with messages
        becoming dead letters)


  5. the leader sees the migration is complete and updates the partition table


  6. all nodes eventually see the new partitioning and use ``N2``

     i. each node sends an acknowledgement message to ``N1``

     ii. when ``N1`` receives the acknowledgement it can count down the pending
         acknowledgements and remove forwarding when complete

     iii. when ``N2`` receives the acknowledgement it can open the buffer for the
          sending node (if buffers are used)


The default approach is to take options 2a, 3a, and 4a - allowing ``A`` on
``N1`` to continue processing messages during migration and then forwarding any
messages during the update transition. This assumes stateless actors that do not
have a dependency on message ordering from any given source.

- If an actor has a distributed durable mailbox then nothing needs to
  be done, other than migrating the actor.

- If message ordering needs to be maintained during the update
  transition then option 3b can be used, creating buffers per sending node.

- If the actors are robust to message send failures then the dropping
  messages approach can be used (with no forwarding or buffering needed).

- If an actor is a singleton (only one instance possible throughout
  the cluster) and state is transfered during the migration
  initialization, then options 2b and 3b would be required.

Support for stateful singleton actor will come in future releases of
Akka, most likely Akka 2.2.

Commit message:

Added 'Intro' section to new cluster specification/docs. Also minor other edits.
Signed-off-by: Jonas Bonér <jonas@jonasboner.com>

akka-docs/cluster/new.rst, after:


.. _cluster:

################
 New Clustering
################


Intro
=====

Akka Cluster provides a fault-tolerant, elastic, decentralized
peer-to-peer cluster with no single point of failure (SPOF) or single
point of bottleneck (SPOB). It implemented as a Dynamo-style system
using gossip protocols, automatic failure detection, automatic
partitioning, handoff and cluster rebalancing. But with some
differences due to the fact that it is not just managing passive data,
but actors, e.g. active, sometimes stateful, components that have
requirements on message ordering, the number of active instances in
the cluster etc.
 
Terms
=====

These terms are used throughout the documentation. 

**node**
  A logical member of a cluster. There could be multiple nodes on a physical
  machine. Defined by a `hostname:port` tuple.

**cluster**
  A set of nodes. Contains distributed Akka applications.

**partition**
  An actor (possibly a subtree of actors) in the Akka application that
  is distributed within the cluster.

**partition path**
  Also referred to as the actor address on the format `actor1/actor2/actor3`

**base node**
  The first node (with nodes in sorted order) that contains a partition.

**instance count**
  The number of instances of a partition in the cluster. Also referred to as the
  ``N-value`` of the partition.

**partition table**
  A mapping from partition path to base node and its ``N-value``
  (e.g. its instance count).
 
Cluster
=======

A cluster is made up of a set of member nodes. The identifier for each node is a
`hostname:port` pair. An Akka application is distributed over a cluster with each node
hosting some part of the application. Cluster membership and partitioning of the
application are decoupled. A node could be a member of a cluster without hosting
any actors.

Gossip
------

The cluster membership used in Akka is based on Amazon's `Dynamo`_
system and particularly the approach taken Basho's' `Riak`_
distributed database. Cluster membership is communicated using a
`Gossip Protocol`_. The current state of the cluster is gossiped
randomly through the cluster. Joining a cluster is initiated by
specifying a set of ``seed`` nodes with which to begin gossiping.

The gossip protocol maintains the list of live and dead
nodes. Periodically, default is every 1 second, this module chooses a
random node and initiates a round of Gossip with it. Whenever it gets
gossip updates it updates the `Failure Detector`_ with the liveness
information.

The nodes defined as ``seed`` nodes are just regular member nodes whos
only "special role" is to function as contact points in the cluster
and to help breaking logical partitions as seen in the gossip
algorithm defined below.

During each of these runs the node initiates gossip exchange according
to following rules:

1. Gossip to random live membership node (if any).
2. Gossip to random unreachable node with certain probability
   depending on number of unreachable and live nodes (if any).
3. If the node gossiped to at (1) was not a ``seed`` node, or the
   number of live nodes is less than number of seeds, then gossip to
   random ``seed`` node with a certain probability depending on number
   of unreachable, seed and live nodes.

All gossip is done over standard TCP and do not require multicast. 

TODO: More details about our version of push-pull-gossip.

.. _Gossip Protocol: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol
.. _Dynamo: http://www.allthingsdistributed.com/files/amazon-dynamo-sosp2007.pdf
.. _Riak: http://basho.com/technology/architecture/

Vector Clocks
-------------

`Vector clocks`_ are an algorithm for generating a partial ordering of
events in a distributed system and detecting causality violations.

We use vector clocks to to reconcile and merge differences in cluster state
during gossiping. A vector clock is a set of (node, counter) pairs. Each update
to the cluster state has an accompanying update to the vector clock.

One problem with vector clocks is that their history can over time be
very long, which will both make comparisons take longer time as well
as take up unnecessary memory. To solve that problem we do pruning of
the vector clocks according to the `pruning algorithm
<http://wiki.basho.com/Vector-Clocks.html#Vector-Clock-Pruning>_`
in Riak.

.. _Vector Clocks: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_clock

Gossip convergence
------------------

Information about the cluster converges at certain points of time. This is when
all nodes have seen the same cluster state. To be able to recognise this
convergence a map from node to current vector clock is also passed as part of
the gossip state. Gossip convergence cannot occur while any nodes are
unreachable, either the nodes become reachable again, or the nodes need to be
moved into the ``down`` or ``removed`` states (see section on `Member
states`_ below).

Failure Detector
----------------- 

The failure detector is responsible for trying to detect if a node is
unreachable from the rest of the cluster. For this we are using an
implementation of the `Phi Accrual Failure Detector` as defined in this
`paper <http://ddg.jaist.ac.jp/pub/HDY+04.pdf>`_ by Hayashibara et al. 

An accrual failure detector decouple monitoring and
interpretation. That makes them applicable to a wider area of
scenarios and more adequate to build generic failure detection
services. The idea is that it is keeping a history of failure
statistics, calculated from heartbeats recevied from the gossip
protocol, and is trying to do educated guesses by taking multiple
factors, and how they accumulate over time, into account in order to
come up with a better guess if a specific node is up or down. Rather
than just answering "yes" or "no" to the question "is the node down?"
it returns a ``phi`` value representing the likelyhood that the node
is down.

The ``threshold`` that is the basis for the calculation is
configurable by the user. A low ``threshold`` is prone to generate
many wrong suspicions but ensures a quick detection in the event of a
real crash. Conversely, a high ``threshold`` generates fewer mistakes
but needs more time to detect actual crashes. The default
``threshold`` is 8 and is appropriate for most situations. However in
cloud environments, such as Amazon EC2, the value could be increased
to 12 in order to account for network issues that sometimes occur on
such platforms.

Leader
------

After gossip convergence a leader for the cluster can be determined. There is no
leader election process, the leader can always be recognised deterministically
by any node whenever there is gossip convergence. The leader is simply the first
node in sorted order that is able to take the leadership role, where the only
allowed member states for a leader are ``up`` or ``leaving``.

The role of the leader is to shift members in and out of the cluster, changing
``joining`` members to the ``up`` state or ``exiting`` members to the
``removed`` state, and to schedule rebalancing across the cluster. Currently
leader actions are only triggered by receiving a new cluster state with gossip
convergence but it may also be possible for the user to explicitly rebalance the
cluster by specifying migrations, or to rebalance the cluster automatically
based on metrics gossiped by the member nodes.

The leader also has the power, if configured so, to "auto-down" a node
that according the Failure Detector is considured unreachable. This
means setting the unreachable node status to ``down`` automatically.

Membership Lifecycle
--------------------

A node begins in the ``joining`` state. Once all nodes have seen that the new
node is joining (through gossip convergence) the leader will set the member
state to ``up`` and can start assigning partitions to the new node.

If a node is leaving the cluster in a safe, expected manner then it switches to
the ``leaving`` state. The leader will reassign partitions across the cluster
(it is possible for a leaving node to itself be the leader). When all partition
handoff has completed then the node will change to the ``exiting`` state. Once
all nodes have seen the exiting state (convergence) the leader will remove the
node from the cluster, marking it as ``removed``.

A node can also be removed forcefully by moving it directly to the ``removed``
state using the ``remove`` action. The cluster will rebalance based on the new
cluster membership.

If a node is unreachable then gossip convergence is not possible and therefore
any leader actions are also not possible (for instance, allowing a node to
become a part of the cluster, or changing actor distribution). To be able to
move forward the state of the unreachable nodes must be changed. If the
unreachable node is experiencing only transient difficulties then it can be
explicitly marked as ``down`` using the ``down`` user action. When this node
comes back up and begins gossiping it will automatically go through the joining
process again. If the unreachable node will be permanently down then it can be
removed from the cluster directly with the ``remove`` user action. The cluster
can also *auto-down* a node using the accrual failure detector.

This means that nodes can join and leave the cluster at any point in
time, e.g. provide cluster elasticity.


State diagram for the member states
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. image:: images/member-states.png


Member states
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **joining**
    transient state when joining a cluster

- **up**
    normal operating state

- **leaving** / **exiting**
    states during graceful removal

- **removed**
    tombstone state (no longer a member)

- **down**
    marked as down/offline/unreachable


User actions
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **join**
    join a single node to a cluster - can be explicit or automatic on
    startup if a list of seed nodes have been specified in the configuration

- **leave**
    tell a node to leave the cluster gracefully

- **down**
    mark a node as temporarily down

- **remove**
    remove a node from the cluster immediately


Leader actions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The leader have the following duties:

- shifting members in and out of the cluster

  - joining -> up

  - exiting -> removed

- partition distribution

  - scheduling handoffs (pending changes)

  - setting the partition table (partition path -> base node)

  - Automatic rebalancing based on runtime metrics in the
    system (such as CPU, RAM, Garbage Collection, mailbox depth etc.)

Partitioning
============

Each partition (an actor or actor subtree) in the actor system is
assigned to a base node. The mapping from partition path (actor
address on the format "a/b/c") to base node is stored in the partition
table and is maintained as part of the cluster state through the
gossip protocol. The partition table is only updated by the leader
node. If the partition has a configured instance count, referred to as
the ``N-value``, greater than one, then the location of the other
instances can be found deterministically by counting from the base
node. (The ``N-value`` is larger than 1 when a actor is configured to
be routed.) The first instance will be found on the base node, and the
other instances on the next N-1 nodes, given the nodes in sorted
order.

TODO: discuss how different N values within the tree work (especially subtrees
with a greater or lesser N value). A simple implementation would only allow the
highest-up-the-tree, non-singular (greater than one) value to be used for any
subtree.

When rebalancing is required the leader will schedule handoffs, gossiping a set
of pending changes, and when each change is complete the leader will update the
partition table.

TODO: look further into how actors will be distributed and also avoiding
unnecessary migrations just to create a more balanced cluster.


Handoff
-------

Handoff for an actor-based system is different than for a data-based system. The
most important point is that message ordering (from a given node to a given
actor instance) may need to be maintained. If an actor is a singleton
actor (only one instance possible throughout the cluster) then the
cluster may also need to assure that there is only one such actor active at any
one time. Both of these situations can be handled by forwarding and buffering
messages during transitions.

A *graceful handoff* (one where the previous host node is up and running during
the handoff), given a previous host node ``N1``, a new host node ``N2``, and an
actor partition ``A`` to be migrated from ``N1`` to ``N2``, has this general
structure:

  1. the leader sets a pending change for ``N1`` to handoff ``A`` to ``N2``

  2. ``N1`` notices the pending change and sends an initialization message to ``N2``

  3. in response ``N2`` creates ``A`` and sends back a ready message

  4. after receiving the ready message ``N1`` marks the change as
     complete and shuts down ``A``

  5. the leader sees the migration is complete and updates the partition table

  6. all nodes eventually see the new partitioning and use ``N2``


Transitions
^^^^^^^^^^^

There are transition times in the handoff process where different approaches can
be used to give different guarantees.


Migration transition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first transition starts when ``N1`` initiates the moving of ``A`` and ends
when ``N1`` receives the ready message, and is referred to as the *migration
transition*.

The first question is; during the migration transition, should:

- ``N1`` continue to process messages for ``A``?  

- Or is it important that no messages for ``A`` are processed on
  ``N1`` once migration begins?

If it is okay for the previous host node ``N1`` to process messages during migration
then there is nothing that needs to be done at this point.

If no messages are to be processed on the previous host node during migration
then there are two possibilities: the messages are forwarded to the new host and
buffered until the actor is ready, or the messages are simply dropped by
terminating the actor and allowing the normal dead letter process to be used.


Update transition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The second transition begins when the migration is marked as complete
and ends when all nodes have the updated partition table (when all
nodes will use ``N2`` as the host for ``A``), e.g. we have
convergence, and is referred to as the *update transition*.

Once the update transition begins ``N1`` can forward any messages it receives
for ``A`` to the new host ``N2``. The question is whether or not message
ordering needs to be preserved. If messages sent to the previous host node
``N1`` are being forwarded, then it is possible that a message sent to ``N1``
could be forwarded after a direct message to the new host ``N2``, breaking
message ordering from a client to actor ``A``.

In this situation ``N2`` can keep a buffer for messages per sending
node. Each buffer is flushed and removed when an acknowledgement
(``ack``) message has been received. When each node in the cluster
sees the partition update it first sends an ``ack`` message to the
previous host node ``N1`` before beginning to use ``N2`` as the new
host for ``A``. Any messages sent from the client node directly to
``N2`` will be buffered. ``N1`` can count down the number of acks to
determine when no more forwarding is needed. The ``ack`` message from
any node will always follow any other messages sent to ``N1``. When
``N1`` receives the ``ack`` message it also forwards it to ``N2`` and
again this ``ack`` message will follow any other messages already
forwarded for ``A``. When ``N2`` receives an ``ack`` message, the
buffer for the sending node can be flushed and removed. Any subsequent
messages from this sending node can be queued normally. Once all nodes
in the cluster have acknowledged the partition change and ``N2`` has
cleared all buffers, the handoff is complete and message ordering has
been preserved. In practice the buffers should remain small as it is
only those messages sent directly to ``N2`` before the acknowledgement
has been forwarded that will be buffered.


Graceful handoff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A more complete process for graceful handoff would be:

  1. the leader sets a pending change for ``N1`` to handoff ``A`` to ``N2``


  2. ``N1`` notices the pending change and sends an initialization message to
     ``N2``. Options:

     a. keep ``A`` on ``N1`` active and continuing processing messages as normal

     b. ``N1`` forwards all messages for ``A`` to ``N2``

     c. ``N1`` drops all messages for ``A`` (terminate ``A`` with messages
        becoming dead letters)


  3. in response ``N2`` creates ``A`` and sends back a ready message. Options:

     a. ``N2`` simply processes messages for ``A`` as normal

     b. ``N2`` creates a buffer per sending node for ``A``. Each buffer is
        opened (flushed and removed) when an acknowledgement for the sending
        node has been received (via ``N1``)


  4. after receiving the ready message ``N1`` marks the change as complete. Options:

     a. ``N1`` forwards all messages for ``A`` to ``N2`` during the update transition

     b. ``N1`` drops all messages for ``A`` (terminate ``A`` with messages
        becoming dead letters)


  5. the leader sees the migration is complete and updates the partition table


  6. all nodes eventually see the new partitioning and use ``N2``

     i. each node sends an acknowledgement message to ``N1``

     ii. when ``N1`` receives the acknowledgement it can count down the pending
         acknowledgements and remove forwarding when complete

     iii. when ``N2`` receives the acknowledgement it can open the buffer for the
          sending node (if buffers are used)


The default approach is to take options 2a, 3a, and 4a - allowing ``A`` on
``N1`` to continue processing messages during migration and then forwarding any
messages during the update transition. This assumes stateless actors that do not
have a dependency on message ordering from any given source.

- If an actor has a distributed durable mailbox then nothing needs to
  be done, other than migrating the actor.

- If message ordering needs to be maintained during the update
  transition then option 3b can be used, creating buffers per sending node.

- If the actors are robust to message send failures then the dropping
  messages approach can be used (with no forwarding or buffering needed).

- If an actor is a singleton (only one instance possible throughout
  the cluster) and state is transfered during the migration
  initialization, then options 2b and 3b would be required.

Support for stateful singleton actor will come in future releases of
Akka, most likely Akka 2.2.
