akka-docs/general/addressing.rst, before:

.. _addressing:

Actor References, Paths and Addresses
=====================================

This chapter describes how actors are identified and located within a possibly
distributed actor system. It ties into the central idea that
:ref:`actor-systems` form intrinsic supervision hierarchies as well as that
communication between actors is transparent with respect to their placement
across multiple network nodes.

What is an Actor Reference?
---------------------------

An actor reference is a subtype of :class:`ActorRef`, whose foremost purpose is 
to support sending messages to the actor it represents. Each actor has access 
to its canonical (local) reference through the :meth:`self` field; this 
reference is also included as sender reference by default for all messages sent 
to other actors. Conversely, during message processing the actor has access to 
a reference representing the sender of the current message through the 
:meth:`sender` field.

There are several different types of actor references that are supported 
depending on the configuration of the actor system:

- Purely local actor references are used by actor systems which are not 
  configured to support networking functions. These actor references cannot 
  ever be sent across a network connection while retaining their functionality.
- Local actor references when remoting is enabled are used by actor systems 
  which support networking functions for those references which represent 
  actors within the same JVM. In order to be recognizable also when sent to 
  other network nodes, these references include protocol and remote addressing 
  information.
- There is a subtype of local actor references which is used for routers (i.e.  
  actors mixing in the :class:`Router` trait). Its logical structure is the 
  same as for the aforementioned local references, but sending a message to 
  them dispatches to one of their children directly instead.
- Remote actor references represent actors which are reachable using remote 
  communication, i.e. sending messages to them will serialize the messages 
  transparently and send them to the other JVM.
- There are several special types of actor references which behave like local 
  actor references for all practical purposes:

  - :class:`AskActorRef` is the special representation of a :meth:`Promise` for 
    the purpose of being completed by the response from an actor; it is created 
    by the :meth:`ActorRef.ask` invocation.
  - :class:`DeadLetterActorRef` is the default implementation of the dead 
    letters service, where all messages are re-routed whose routees are shut
    down or non-existent.

- And then there are some one-off internal implementations which you should 
  never really see:

  - There is an actor reference which does not represent an actor but acts only 
    as a pseudo-supervisor for the root guardian, we call it “the one who walks 
    the bubbles of space-time”.
  - The first logging service started before actually firing up actor creation 
    facilities is a fake actor reference which accepts log events and prints 
    them directly to standard output; it is :class:`Logging.StandardOutLogger`.

- **(Future Extension)** Cluster actor references represent clustered actor 
  services which may be replicated, migrated or load-balanced across multiple 
  cluster nodes. As such they are virtual names which the cluster service 
  translates into local or remote actor references as appropriate.

What is an Actor Path?
----------------------

Since actors are created in a strictly hierarchical fashion, there exists a 
unique sequence of actor names given by recursively following the supervision 
links between child and parent down towards the root of the actor system. This 
sequence can be seen as enclosing folders in a file system, hence we adopted 
the name “path” to refer to it. As in some real file-systems there also are 
“symbolic links”, i.e. one actor may be reachable using more than one path, 
where all but one involve some translation which decouples part of the path 
from the actor’s actual supervision ancestor line; these specialities are 
described in the sub-sections to follow.

Each actor path has an address component, describing the protocol and location 
by which the corresponding actor is reachable, followed by the names of the 
actors in the hierarchy from the root up. Examples are::

  "akka://my-system/app/service-a/worker1"               // purely local
  "akka://my-system@serv.example.com:5678/app/service-b" // local or remote
  "cluster://my-cluster/service-c"                       // clustered (Future Extension)

Here, ``akka`` is the default remote protocol for the 2.0 release, and others 
are pluggable. The interpretation of the host & port part (i.e. 
``serv.example.com:5678`` in the example) depends on the transport mechanism 
used, but it must abide by the URI structural rules.

Logical Actor Paths
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The unique path obtained by following the parental supervision links towards 
the root guardian is called the logical actor path. This path matches exactly 
the creation ancestry of an actor, so it is completely deterministic as soon as 
the actor system’s remoting configuration (and with it the address component of 
the path) is set.

Physical Actor Paths
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the logical actor path describes the functional location within one actor 
system, configuration-based remote deployment means that an actor may be 
created on a different network host as its parent, i.e. within a different 
actor system. In this case, following the actor path from the root guardian up 
entails traversing the network, which is a costly operation. Therefore, each 
actor also has a physical path, starting at the root guardian of the actor 
system where the actual actor object resides. Using this path as sender 
reference when querying other actors will let them reply directly to this 
actor, minimizing delays incurred by routing.

One important aspect is that a physical actor path never spans multiple actor 
systems or JVMs. This means that the logical path (supervision hierarchy) and 
the physical path (actor deployment) of an actor may diverge if one of its 
ancestors is remotely supervised.

Virtual Actor Paths **(Future Extension)**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to be able to replicate and migrate actors across a cluster of Akka 
nodes, another level of indirection has to be introduced. The cluster component 
therefore provides a translation from virtual paths to physical paths which may 
change in reaction to node failures, cluster rebalancing, etc.

*This area is still under active development, expect updates in this section 
for the 2.1 release.*

How are Actor References obtained?
----------------------------------

There are two general categories to how actor references may be obtained: by 
creating actors or by looking them up, where the latter functionality comes in 
the two flavours of creating actor references from concrete actor paths and 
querying the logical actor hierarchy.

*While local and remote actor references and their paths work in the same way 
concerning the facilities mentioned below, the exact semantics of clustered 
actor references and their paths—while certainly as similar as possible—may 
differ in certain aspects, owing to the virtual nature of those paths. Expect 
updates for the 2.1 release.*

Creating Actors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An actor system is typically started by creating actors above the guardian 
actor using the :meth:`ActorSystem.actorOf` method and then using 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorOf` from within the created actors to spawn the actor 
tree. These methods return a reference to the newly created actor. Each actor 
has direct access to references for its parent, itself and its children. These 
references may be sent within messages to other actors, enabling those to reply 
directly.

Looking up Actors by Concrete Path
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition, actor references may be looked up using the
:meth:`ActorSystem.actorFor` method, which returns an (unverified) local,
remote or clustered actor reference. Sending messages to such a reference or
attempting to observe its livelyhood will traverse the actor hierarchy of the
actor system from top to bottom by passing messages from parent to child until
either the target is reached or failure is certain, i.e. a name in the path
does not exist (in practice this process will be optimized using caches, but it
still has added cost compared to using the physical actor path, which can for
example to obtained from the sender reference included in replies from that
actor). The messages passed are handled automatically by Akka, so this process
is not visible to client code.

Absolute vs. Relative Paths
```````````````````````````

In addition to :meth:`ActorSystem.actorFor` there is also 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorFor`, which is available inside any actor as 
``context.actorFor``. This yields an actor reference much like its twin on 
:class:`ActorSystem`, but instead of looking up the path starting from the root 
of the actor tree it starts out on the current actor. Path elements consisting 
of two dots (``".."``) may be used to access the parent actor. You can for 
example send a message to a specific sibling::

  context.actorFor("../brother") ! msg

Absolute paths may of course also be looked up on `context` in the usual way, i.e.

.. code-block:: scala

  context.actorFor("/user/serviceA") ! msg

will work as expected.

Querying the Logical Actor Hierarchy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since the actor system forms a file-system like hierarchy, matching on paths is 
possible in the same was as supported by Unix shells: you may replace (parts 
of) path element names with wildcards (`«*»` and `«?»`) to formulate a 
selection which may match zero or more actual actors. Because the result is not 
a single actor reference, it has a different type :class:`ActorSelection` and 
does not support the full set of operations an :class:`ActorRef` does. 
Selections may be formulated using the :meth:`ActorSystem.actorSelection` and 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorSelection` methods and do support sending messages::

  context.actorSelection("../*") ! msg

will send `msg` to all siblings including the current actor. As for references 
obtained using `actorFor`, a traversal of the supervision hierarchy is done in 
order to perform the message send. As the exact set of actors which match a 
selection may change even while a message is making its way to the recipients, 
it is not possible to watch a selection for liveliness changes. In order to do 
that, resolve the uncertainty by sending a request and gathering all answers, 
extracting the sender references, and then watch all discovered concrete 
actors. This scheme of resolving a selection may be improved upon in a future 
release.

The Interplay with Remote Deployment
------------------------------------

When an actor creates a child, the actor system’s deployer will decide whether 
the new actor resides in the same JVM or on another node. In the second case, 
creation of the actor will be triggered via a network connection to happen in a 
different JVM and consequently within a different actor system. The remote 
system will place the new actor below a special path reserved for this purpose 
and the supervisor of the new actor will be a remote actor reference 
(representing that actor which triggered its creation). In this case, 
:meth:`parent` (the supervisor reference) and :meth:`context.path.parent` (the 
parent node in the actor’s path) do not represent the same actor. However, 
looking up the child’s name within the supervisor will find it on the remote 
node, preserving logical structure e.g. when sending to an unresolved actor 
reference.

The Interplay with Clustering **(Future Extension)**
----------------------------------------------------

*This section is subject to change!*

When creating a scaled-out actor subtree, a cluster name is created for a 
routed actor reference, where sending to this reference will send to one (or 
more) of the actual actors created in the cluster. In order for those actors to 
be able to query other actors while processing their messages, their sender 
reference must be unique for each of the replicas, which means that physical 
paths will be used as ``self`` references for these instances. In the case 
of replication for achieving fault-tolerance the opposite is required: the 
``self`` reference will be a virtual (cluster) path so that in case of 
migration or fail-over communication is resumed with the fresh instance.

What is the Address part used for?
----------------------------------

When sending an actor reference across the network, it is represented by its 
path. Hence, the path must fully encode all information necessary to send 
messages to the underlying actor. This is achieved by encoding protocol, host 
and port in the address part of the path string. When an actor system receives 
an actor path from a remote node, it checks whether that path’s address matches 
the address of this actor system, in which case it will be resolved to the 
actor’s local reference. Otherwise, it will be represented by a remote actor 
reference.

Special Paths used by Akka
--------------------------

At the root of the path hierarchy resides the root guardian above which all 
other actors are found. The next level consists of the following:

- ``"/user"`` is the guardian actor for all user-created top-level actors; 
  actors created using :meth:`ActorSystem.actorOf` are found at the next level.
- ``"/system"`` is the guardian actor for all system-created top-level actors, 
  e.g. logging listeners or actors automatically deployed by configuration at 
  the start of the actor system.
- ``"/deadLetters"`` is the dead letter actor, which is where all messages sent to 
  stopped or non-existing actors are re-routed.
- ``"/temp"`` is the guardian for all short-lived system-created actors, e.g.  
  those which are used in the implementation of :meth:`ActorRef.ask`.
- ``"/remote"`` is an artificial path below which all actors reside whose 
  supervisors are remote actor references

Future extensions:

- ``"/service"`` is an artificial path below which actors can be presented by 
  means of configuration, i.e. deployed at system start-up or just-in-time 
  (triggered by look-up)
- ``"/alias"`` is an artificial path below which other actors may be “mounted”
  (as in the Unix file-system sense) by path—local or remote—to give them
  logical names.

Commit message:

add picture displaying relations between ref/path/cell/actor

akka-docs/general/addressing.rst, after:

.. _addressing:

Actor References, Paths and Addresses
=====================================

This chapter describes how actors are identified and located within a possibly
distributed actor system. It ties into the central idea that
:ref:`actor-systems` form intrinsic supervision hierarchies as well as that
communication between actors is transparent with respect to their placement
across multiple network nodes.

.. image:: ActorPath.png

The above image displays the relationship between the most important entities
within an actor system, please read on for the details.

What is an Actor Reference?
---------------------------

An actor reference is a subtype of :class:`ActorRef`, whose foremost purpose is 
to support sending messages to the actor it represents. Each actor has access 
to its canonical (local) reference through the :meth:`self` field; this 
reference is also included as sender reference by default for all messages sent 
to other actors. Conversely, during message processing the actor has access to 
a reference representing the sender of the current message through the 
:meth:`sender` field.

There are several different types of actor references that are supported 
depending on the configuration of the actor system:

- Purely local actor references are used by actor systems which are not 
  configured to support networking functions. These actor references cannot 
  ever be sent across a network connection while retaining their functionality.
- Local actor references when remoting is enabled are used by actor systems 
  which support networking functions for those references which represent 
  actors within the same JVM. In order to be recognizable also when sent to 
  other network nodes, these references include protocol and remote addressing 
  information.
- There is a subtype of local actor references which is used for routers (i.e.  
  actors mixing in the :class:`Router` trait). Its logical structure is the 
  same as for the aforementioned local references, but sending a message to 
  them dispatches to one of their children directly instead.
- Remote actor references represent actors which are reachable using remote 
  communication, i.e. sending messages to them will serialize the messages 
  transparently and send them to the other JVM.
- There are several special types of actor references which behave like local 
  actor references for all practical purposes:

  - :class:`AskActorRef` is the special representation of a :meth:`Promise` for 
    the purpose of being completed by the response from an actor; it is created 
    by the :meth:`ActorRef.ask` invocation.
  - :class:`DeadLetterActorRef` is the default implementation of the dead 
    letters service, where all messages are re-routed whose routees are shut
    down or non-existent.

- And then there are some one-off internal implementations which you should 
  never really see:

  - There is an actor reference which does not represent an actor but acts only 
    as a pseudo-supervisor for the root guardian, we call it “the one who walks 
    the bubbles of space-time”.
  - The first logging service started before actually firing up actor creation 
    facilities is a fake actor reference which accepts log events and prints 
    them directly to standard output; it is :class:`Logging.StandardOutLogger`.

- **(Future Extension)** Cluster actor references represent clustered actor 
  services which may be replicated, migrated or load-balanced across multiple 
  cluster nodes. As such they are virtual names which the cluster service 
  translates into local or remote actor references as appropriate.

What is an Actor Path?
----------------------

Since actors are created in a strictly hierarchical fashion, there exists a 
unique sequence of actor names given by recursively following the supervision 
links between child and parent down towards the root of the actor system. This 
sequence can be seen as enclosing folders in a file system, hence we adopted 
the name “path” to refer to it. As in some real file-systems there also are 
“symbolic links”, i.e. one actor may be reachable using more than one path, 
where all but one involve some translation which decouples part of the path 
from the actor’s actual supervision ancestor line; these specialities are 
described in the sub-sections to follow.

Each actor path has an address component, describing the protocol and location 
by which the corresponding actor is reachable, followed by the names of the 
actors in the hierarchy from the root up. Examples are::

  "akka://my-system/app/service-a/worker1"               // purely local
  "akka://my-system@serv.example.com:5678/app/service-b" // local or remote
  "cluster://my-cluster/service-c"                       // clustered (Future Extension)

Here, ``akka`` is the default remote protocol for the 2.0 release, and others 
are pluggable. The interpretation of the host & port part (i.e. 
``serv.example.com:5678`` in the example) depends on the transport mechanism 
used, but it must abide by the URI structural rules.

Logical Actor Paths
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The unique path obtained by following the parental supervision links towards 
the root guardian is called the logical actor path. This path matches exactly 
the creation ancestry of an actor, so it is completely deterministic as soon as 
the actor system’s remoting configuration (and with it the address component of 
the path) is set.

Physical Actor Paths
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the logical actor path describes the functional location within one actor 
system, configuration-based remote deployment means that an actor may be 
created on a different network host as its parent, i.e. within a different 
actor system. In this case, following the actor path from the root guardian up 
entails traversing the network, which is a costly operation. Therefore, each 
actor also has a physical path, starting at the root guardian of the actor 
system where the actual actor object resides. Using this path as sender 
reference when querying other actors will let them reply directly to this 
actor, minimizing delays incurred by routing.

One important aspect is that a physical actor path never spans multiple actor 
systems or JVMs. This means that the logical path (supervision hierarchy) and 
the physical path (actor deployment) of an actor may diverge if one of its 
ancestors is remotely supervised.

Virtual Actor Paths **(Future Extension)**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to be able to replicate and migrate actors across a cluster of Akka 
nodes, another level of indirection has to be introduced. The cluster component 
therefore provides a translation from virtual paths to physical paths which may 
change in reaction to node failures, cluster rebalancing, etc.

*This area is still under active development, expect updates in this section 
for the 2.1 release.*

How are Actor References obtained?
----------------------------------

There are two general categories to how actor references may be obtained: by 
creating actors or by looking them up, where the latter functionality comes in 
the two flavours of creating actor references from concrete actor paths and 
querying the logical actor hierarchy.

*While local and remote actor references and their paths work in the same way 
concerning the facilities mentioned below, the exact semantics of clustered 
actor references and their paths—while certainly as similar as possible—may 
differ in certain aspects, owing to the virtual nature of those paths. Expect 
updates for the 2.1 release.*

Creating Actors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An actor system is typically started by creating actors above the guardian 
actor using the :meth:`ActorSystem.actorOf` method and then using 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorOf` from within the created actors to spawn the actor 
tree. These methods return a reference to the newly created actor. Each actor 
has direct access to references for its parent, itself and its children. These 
references may be sent within messages to other actors, enabling those to reply 
directly.

Looking up Actors by Concrete Path
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition, actor references may be looked up using the
:meth:`ActorSystem.actorFor` method, which returns an (unverified) local,
remote or clustered actor reference. Sending messages to such a reference or
attempting to observe its livelyhood will traverse the actor hierarchy of the
actor system from top to bottom by passing messages from parent to child until
either the target is reached or failure is certain, i.e. a name in the path
does not exist (in practice this process will be optimized using caches, but it
still has added cost compared to using the physical actor path, which can for
example to obtained from the sender reference included in replies from that
actor). The messages passed are handled automatically by Akka, so this process
is not visible to client code.

Absolute vs. Relative Paths
```````````````````````````

In addition to :meth:`ActorSystem.actorFor` there is also 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorFor`, which is available inside any actor as 
``context.actorFor``. This yields an actor reference much like its twin on 
:class:`ActorSystem`, but instead of looking up the path starting from the root 
of the actor tree it starts out on the current actor. Path elements consisting 
of two dots (``".."``) may be used to access the parent actor. You can for 
example send a message to a specific sibling::

  context.actorFor("../brother") ! msg

Absolute paths may of course also be looked up on `context` in the usual way, i.e.

.. code-block:: scala

  context.actorFor("/user/serviceA") ! msg

will work as expected.

Querying the Logical Actor Hierarchy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since the actor system forms a file-system like hierarchy, matching on paths is 
possible in the same was as supported by Unix shells: you may replace (parts 
of) path element names with wildcards (`«*»` and `«?»`) to formulate a 
selection which may match zero or more actual actors. Because the result is not 
a single actor reference, it has a different type :class:`ActorSelection` and 
does not support the full set of operations an :class:`ActorRef` does. 
Selections may be formulated using the :meth:`ActorSystem.actorSelection` and 
:meth:`ActorContext.actorSelection` methods and do support sending messages::

  context.actorSelection("../*") ! msg

will send `msg` to all siblings including the current actor. As for references 
obtained using `actorFor`, a traversal of the supervision hierarchy is done in 
order to perform the message send. As the exact set of actors which match a 
selection may change even while a message is making its way to the recipients, 
it is not possible to watch a selection for liveliness changes. In order to do 
that, resolve the uncertainty by sending a request and gathering all answers, 
extracting the sender references, and then watch all discovered concrete 
actors. This scheme of resolving a selection may be improved upon in a future 
release.

The Interplay with Remote Deployment
------------------------------------

When an actor creates a child, the actor system’s deployer will decide whether 
the new actor resides in the same JVM or on another node. In the second case, 
creation of the actor will be triggered via a network connection to happen in a 
different JVM and consequently within a different actor system. The remote 
system will place the new actor below a special path reserved for this purpose 
and the supervisor of the new actor will be a remote actor reference 
(representing that actor which triggered its creation). In this case, 
:meth:`parent` (the supervisor reference) and :meth:`context.path.parent` (the 
parent node in the actor’s path) do not represent the same actor. However, 
looking up the child’s name within the supervisor will find it on the remote 
node, preserving logical structure e.g. when sending to an unresolved actor 
reference.

The Interplay with Clustering **(Future Extension)**
----------------------------------------------------

*This section is subject to change!*

When creating a scaled-out actor subtree, a cluster name is created for a 
routed actor reference, where sending to this reference will send to one (or 
more) of the actual actors created in the cluster. In order for those actors to 
be able to query other actors while processing their messages, their sender 
reference must be unique for each of the replicas, which means that physical 
paths will be used as ``self`` references for these instances. In the case 
of replication for achieving fault-tolerance the opposite is required: the 
``self`` reference will be a virtual (cluster) path so that in case of 
migration or fail-over communication is resumed with the fresh instance.

What is the Address part used for?
----------------------------------

When sending an actor reference across the network, it is represented by its 
path. Hence, the path must fully encode all information necessary to send 
messages to the underlying actor. This is achieved by encoding protocol, host 
and port in the address part of the path string. When an actor system receives 
an actor path from a remote node, it checks whether that path’s address matches 
the address of this actor system, in which case it will be resolved to the 
actor’s local reference. Otherwise, it will be represented by a remote actor 
reference.

Special Paths used by Akka
--------------------------

At the root of the path hierarchy resides the root guardian above which all 
other actors are found. The next level consists of the following:

- ``"/user"`` is the guardian actor for all user-created top-level actors; 
  actors created using :meth:`ActorSystem.actorOf` are found at the next level.
- ``"/system"`` is the guardian actor for all system-created top-level actors, 
  e.g. logging listeners or actors automatically deployed by configuration at 
  the start of the actor system.
- ``"/deadLetters"`` is the dead letter actor, which is where all messages sent to 
  stopped or non-existing actors are re-routed.
- ``"/temp"`` is the guardian for all short-lived system-created actors, e.g.  
  those which are used in the implementation of :meth:`ActorRef.ask`.
- ``"/remote"`` is an artificial path below which all actors reside whose 
  supervisors are remote actor references

Future extensions:

- ``"/service"`` is an artificial path below which actors can be presented by 
  means of configuration, i.e. deployed at system start-up or just-in-time 
  (triggered by look-up)
- ``"/alias"`` is an artificial path below which other actors may be “mounted”
  (as in the Unix file-system sense) by path—local or remote—to give them
  logical names.
