akka-docs/general/supervision.rst, before:

.. _supervision:

Supervision and Monitoring
==========================

This chapter outlines the concept behind supervision, the primitives offered
and their semantics. For details on how that translates into real code, please
refer to the corresponding chapters for Scala and Java APIs.

.. _supervision-directives:

What Supervision Means
----------------------

As described in :ref:`actor-systems` supervision describes a dependency
relationship between actors: the supervisor delegates tasks to subordinates and
therefore must respond to their failures.  When a subordinate detects a failure
(i.e. throws an exception), it suspends itself and all its subordinates and
sends a message to its supervisor, signaling failure.  Depending on the nature
of the work to be supervised and the nature of the failure, the supervisor has
four basic choices:

#. Resume the subordinate, keeping its accumulated internal state
#. Restart the subordinate, clearing out its accumulated internal state
#. Terminate the subordinate permanently
#. Escalate the failure

It is important to always view an actor as part of a supervision hierarchy,
which explains the existence of the fourth choice (as a supervisor also is
subordinate to another supervisor higher up) and has implications on the first
three: resuming an actor resumes all its subordinates, restarting an actor
entails restarting all its subordinates, similarly terminating an actor will also
terminating all its subordinates. It should be noted that the default behavior of an
actor is to terminate all its children before restarting, but this can be overridden
using the :meth:`preRestart` hook; the recursive restart applies to all 
children left after this hook has been executed.

Each supervisor is configured with a function translating all possible failure
causes (i.e. exceptions) into one of the four choices given above; notably,
this function does not take the failed actor’s identity as an input. It is
quite easy to come up with examples of structures where this might not seem
flexible enough, e.g. wishing for different strategies to be applied to
different subordinates. At this point it is vital to understand that
supervision is about forming a recursive fault handling structure. If you try
to do too much at one level, it will become hard to reason about, hence the
recommended way in this case is to add a level of supervision.

Akka implements a specific form called “parental supervision”. Actors can only
be created by other actors—where the top-level actor is provided by the
library—and each created actor is supervised by its parent. This restriction
makes the formation of actor supervision hierarchies explicit and encourages
sound design decisions. It should be noted that this also guarantees that
actors cannot be orphaned or attached to supervisors from the outside, which
might otherwise catch them unawares. In addition, this yields a natural and
clean shutdown procedure for (sub-trees of) actor applications.

What Restarting Means
---------------------

When presented with an actor which failed while processing a certain message,
causes for the failure fall into three categories:

* Systematic (i.e. programming) error for the specific message received
* (Transient) failure of some external resource used during processing the message
* Corrupt internal state of the actor

Unless the failure is specifically recognizable, the third cause cannot be
ruled out, which leads to the conclusion that the internal state needs to be
cleared out. If the supervisor decides that its other children or itself is not
affected by the corruption—e.g. because of conscious application of the error
kernel pattern—it is therefore best to restart the child. This is carried out
by creating a new instance of the underlying :class:`Actor` class and replacing
the failed instance with the fresh one inside the child’s :class:`ActorRef`;
the ability to do this is one of the reasons for encapsulating actors within
special references. The new actor then resumes processing its mailbox, meaning
that the restart is not visible outside of the actor itself with the notable
exception that the message during which the failure occurred is not
re-processed.

Restarting an actor in this way recursively terminates all its children. If 
this is not the right approach for certain sub-trees of the supervision 
hierarchy, you may choose to retain the children, in which case they will be 
recursively restarted in the same fashion as the failed parent (with the same 
default to terminate children, which must be overridden on a per-actor basis, 
see :class:`Actor` for details).

What Lifecycle Monitoring Means
-------------------------------

In contrast to the special relationship between parent and child described
above, each actor may monitor any other actor. Since actors emerge from
creation fully alive and restarts are not visible outside of the affected
supervisors, the only state change available for monitoring is the transition
from alive to dead. Monitoring is thus used to tie one actor to another so that
it may react to the other actor’s termination, in contrast to supervision which
reacts to failure.

Lifecycle monitoring is implemented using a :class:`Terminated` message to be
received by the monitoring actor, where the default behavior is to throw a
special :class:`DeathPactException` if not otherwise handled. One important
property is that the message will be delivered irrespective of the order in
which the monitoring request and target’s termination occur, i.e. you still get
the message even if at the time of registration the target is already dead.

Monitoring is particularly useful if a supervisor cannot simply restart its
children and has to terminate them, e.g. in case of errors during actor
initialization. In that case it should monitor those children and re-create
them or schedule itself to retry this at a later time.

Another common use case is that an actor needs to fail in the absence of an
external resource, which may also be one of its own children. If a third party
terminates a child by way of the ``system.stop(child)`` method or sending a
:class:`PoisonPill`, the supervisor might well be affected.

One-For-One Strategy vs. All-For-One Strategy
---------------------------------------------

There are two classes of supervision strategies which come with Akka:
:class:`OneForOneStrategy` and :class:`AllForOneStrategy`. Both are configured
with a mapping from exception type to supervision directive (see
:ref:`above <supervision-directives>`) and limits on how often a child is allowed to fail
before terminating it. The difference between them is that the former applies
the obtained directive only to the failed child, whereas the latter applies it
to all siblings as well. Normally, you should use the
:class:`OneForOneStrategy`, which also is the default if none is specified
explicitly.

The :class:`AllForOneStrategy` is applicable in cases where the ensemble of
children has so tight dependencies among them, that a failure of one child
affects the function of the others, i.e. they are intricably linked. Since a
restart does not clear out the mailbox, it often is best to terminate the children
upon failure and re-create them explicitly from the supervisor (by watching the
children’s lifecycle); otherwise you have to make sure that it is no problem
for any of the actors to receive a message which was queued before the restart
but processed afterwards.

Normally stopping a child (i.e. not in response to a failure) will not
automatically terminate the other children in an all-for-one strategy, that can
easily be done by watching their lifecycle: if the :class:`Terminated` message
is not handled by the supervisor, it will throw a :class:`DeathPathException`
which (depending on its supervisor) will restart it, and the default
:meth:`preRestart` action will terminate all children. Of course this can be
handled explicitly as well.

Please note that creating one-off actors from an all-for-one supervisor entails
that failures escalated by the temporary actor will affect all the permanent
ones. If this is not desired, install an intermediate supervisor; this can very
easily be done by declaring a router of size 1 for the worker, see
:ref:`routing-scala` or :ref:`routing-java`.

Commit message:

clarify restart sequence in supervision.rst

akka-docs/general/supervision.rst, after:

.. _supervision:

Supervision and Monitoring
==========================

This chapter outlines the concept behind supervision, the primitives offered
and their semantics. For details on how that translates into real code, please
refer to the corresponding chapters for Scala and Java APIs.

.. _supervision-directives:

What Supervision Means
----------------------

As described in :ref:`actor-systems` supervision describes a dependency
relationship between actors: the supervisor delegates tasks to subordinates and
therefore must respond to their failures.  When a subordinate detects a failure
(i.e. throws an exception), it suspends itself and all its subordinates and
sends a message to its supervisor, signaling failure.  Depending on the nature
of the work to be supervised and the nature of the failure, the supervisor has
a choice of the following four options:

#. Resume the subordinate, keeping its accumulated internal state
#. Restart the subordinate, clearing out its accumulated internal state
#. Terminate the subordinate permanently
#. Escalate the failure

It is important to always view an actor as part of a supervision hierarchy,
which explains the existence of the fourth choice (as a supervisor also is
subordinate to another supervisor higher up) and has implications on the first
three: resuming an actor resumes all its subordinates, restarting an actor
entails restarting all its subordinates (but see below for more details),
similarly terminating an actor will also terminating all its subordinates. It
should be noted that the default behavior of the :meth:`preRestart` hook of the
:class:`Actor` class is to terminate all its children before restarting, but
this hook can be overridden; the recursive restart applies to all children left
after this hook has been executed.

Each supervisor is configured with a function translating all possible failure
causes (i.e. exceptions) into one of the four choices given above; notably,
this function does not take the failed actor’s identity as an input. It is
quite easy to come up with examples of structures where this might not seem
flexible enough, e.g. wishing for different strategies to be applied to
different subordinates. At this point it is vital to understand that
supervision is about forming a recursive fault handling structure. If you try
to do too much at one level, it will become hard to reason about, hence the
recommended way in this case is to add a level of supervision.

Akka implements a specific form called “parental supervision”. Actors can only
be created by other actors—where the top-level actor is provided by the
library—and each created actor is supervised by its parent. This restriction
makes the formation of actor supervision hierarchies explicit and encourages
sound design decisions. It should be noted that this also guarantees that
actors cannot be orphaned or attached to supervisors from the outside, which
might otherwise catch them unawares. In addition, this yields a natural and
clean shutdown procedure for (sub-trees of) actor applications.

What Restarting Means
---------------------

When presented with an actor which failed while processing a certain message,
causes for the failure fall into three categories:

* Systematic (i.e. programming) error for the specific message received
* (Transient) failure of some external resource used during processing the message
* Corrupt internal state of the actor

Unless the failure is specifically recognizable, the third cause cannot be
ruled out, which leads to the conclusion that the internal state needs to be
cleared out. If the supervisor decides that its other children or itself is not
affected by the corruption—e.g. because of conscious application of the error
kernel pattern—it is therefore best to restart the child. This is carried out
by creating a new instance of the underlying :class:`Actor` class and replacing
the failed instance with the fresh one inside the child’s :class:`ActorRef`;
the ability to do this is one of the reasons for encapsulating actors within
special references. The new actor then resumes processing its mailbox, meaning
that the restart is not visible outside of the actor itself with the notable
exception that the message during which the failure occurred is not
re-processed.

The precise sequence of events during a restart is the following:

* suspend the actor
* call the old instance’s :meth:`supervisionStrategy.handleSupervisorFailing`
  method (defaults to suspending all children)
* call the old instance’s :meth:`preRestart` hook (defaults to sending
  termination requests to all children and calling :meth:`postStop`)
* wait for all children stopped during :meth:`preRestart` to actually terminate
* call the old instance’s :meth:`supervisionStrategy.handleSupervisorRestarted`
  method (defaults to sending restart request to all remaining children)
* create new actor instance by invoking the originally provided factory again
* invoke :meth:`postRestart` on the new instance
* resume the actor

What Lifecycle Monitoring Means
-------------------------------

In contrast to the special relationship between parent and child described
above, each actor may monitor any other actor. Since actors emerge from
creation fully alive and restarts are not visible outside of the affected
supervisors, the only state change available for monitoring is the transition
from alive to dead. Monitoring is thus used to tie one actor to another so that
it may react to the other actor’s termination, in contrast to supervision which
reacts to failure.

Lifecycle monitoring is implemented using a :class:`Terminated` message to be
received by the monitoring actor, where the default behavior is to throw a
special :class:`DeathPactException` if not otherwise handled. One important
property is that the message will be delivered irrespective of the order in
which the monitoring request and target’s termination occur, i.e. you still get
the message even if at the time of registration the target is already dead.

Monitoring is particularly useful if a supervisor cannot simply restart its
children and has to terminate them, e.g. in case of errors during actor
initialization. In that case it should monitor those children and re-create
them or schedule itself to retry this at a later time.

Another common use case is that an actor needs to fail in the absence of an
external resource, which may also be one of its own children. If a third party
terminates a child by way of the ``system.stop(child)`` method or sending a
:class:`PoisonPill`, the supervisor might well be affected.

One-For-One Strategy vs. All-For-One Strategy
---------------------------------------------

There are two classes of supervision strategies which come with Akka:
:class:`OneForOneStrategy` and :class:`AllForOneStrategy`. Both are configured
with a mapping from exception type to supervision directive (see
:ref:`above <supervision-directives>`) and limits on how often a child is allowed to fail
before terminating it. The difference between them is that the former applies
the obtained directive only to the failed child, whereas the latter applies it
to all siblings as well. Normally, you should use the
:class:`OneForOneStrategy`, which also is the default if none is specified
explicitly.

The :class:`AllForOneStrategy` is applicable in cases where the ensemble of
children has so tight dependencies among them, that a failure of one child
affects the function of the others, i.e. they are intricably linked. Since a
restart does not clear out the mailbox, it often is best to terminate the children
upon failure and re-create them explicitly from the supervisor (by watching the
children’s lifecycle); otherwise you have to make sure that it is no problem
for any of the actors to receive a message which was queued before the restart
but processed afterwards.

Normally stopping a child (i.e. not in response to a failure) will not
automatically terminate the other children in an all-for-one strategy, that can
easily be done by watching their lifecycle: if the :class:`Terminated` message
is not handled by the supervisor, it will throw a :class:`DeathPathException`
which (depending on its supervisor) will restart it, and the default
:meth:`preRestart` action will terminate all children. Of course this can be
handled explicitly as well.

Please note that creating one-off actors from an all-for-one supervisor entails
that failures escalated by the temporary actor will affect all the permanent
ones. If this is not desired, install an intermediate supervisor; this can very
easily be done by declaring a router of size 1 for the worker, see
:ref:`routing-scala` or :ref:`routing-java`.
